---
title: "Modern Monetary Theory"
author: Ben Buzzee
date: "Sept. 18, 2018"
permalink: /posts/2019/18/blog-post-3/
fontsize: 14pt
output: 
  html_document
---

## Background

  In the past year I have read many hundreds if not thousands of articles and papers dealing with financial markets, investing, and economics. I need somewhere to summarize the very best of those papers, and moving forward this will be that place. We will start with the paper I just read--which also served as a reminder that I really ought to be writing down some of the key ideas in the papers I read so that I fully asborb and remember them.
  
### The Paper:

[It's Time to Look More Carefully at "Monetary Policy 3 (MP3)" and "Modern Monetary Theory (MMT)(https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/its-time-look-more-carefully-monetary-policy-3-mp3-modern-ray-dalio/)

### The Author

Ray dalio is a billionaire former hedge fund manager who has apparently conquered the markets and now has dedicated (some of) his life to education. He seems very sincere in his efforts to relay his knowledge and wisdom to others in order to make the world a better place. He's got some great books out there worth a read by most everyone.


### Cliffs



>To me the most important engineering puzzle policy makers around the world have to solve for the years ahead is how to get the economic machine to produce economic well-being for most people when monetary policy does not work (meaning interest rate  cuts and QE)

>Hence I believe we will have to go to Monetary Policy 3, which is fiscal and monetary policy coordination that is of a form that we haven't seen before in our lifetimes but has existed in various forms in others' lifetimes or faraway places.

>MMT's most important configuration is the fixing of interest rates at 0% and there is the strict controlling of inflation via the changing of fiscal policy surpluses and deficits, which will produce debt that central banks will monetize... (in the past fiscal budgets were sticky and rates fluctuated... moving forward rates will be anchoraged around 0 and the budget will fluctuate to control inflation/growth)

>An added benefit of this approach is that the money and credit created can be better targeted to fund the desired uses than the process of having the central bank buy financial assets (from the wealthy who simply reallocate their wealth).

>The big risk of this approach arises from the risks of putting the power to create and allocate money, credit, and spending in the hands of politically elected policy makers. 

>We agree with the notion that fiscal policy has to be connected with monetary policy to provide enough stimulus in the next economic downturn . 

So the gist of this article is that Ray and those at Bridgewater believe the effectiveness of QE and interest rate cuts will be diminished in the next downturn. These two types of stimulus also help the rich disproportionately... increasing wealth and influence disparities and motivating the rise of populism on the left and right. As such, he believes we will need coordination between fiscal and monetary policy to stimulate substantial growth the next time around.

The problem is elected officials control fiscal policy, and currently elected officials are relatively uncoordinated, disorganized, and unwilling to compromise or work across the isle. 


### Example:

* Great Depression Stimulus
    + Broke Gold Clauss to alleviate debt
    + Home Owners' Loan Corporation exhanged around 20% of all mortgages for bonds
    + Works Progress Administration hired workers for infrastructure plus
    + Veterans Bonuses
    
Ray then goes on to say that during the slowdown in 1937, "printing money" had little effect (perhapse similar to where we are now in 2019). America really only recovered from the late 30s so quickly because the war united americans and policy makers to massively stimulate the economy. Hopefully we avoid a quick downfall like in the late 30s and also don't need a war to restimulate the economy.






